README.md, before:

# Fileidentification

A python CLI to identify file formats and bulk convert files. It is designed for digital preservation workflows
and is basically a python wrapper around several programs. It uses [pygfried](https://pypi.org/project/pygfried/)
(a CPython extension for [siegfried](https://www.itforarchivists.com/siegfried)), ffmpeg, imagemagick (optionally inkscape) and
LibreOffice, so it's recommended to have those installed. If you are not using fileidentification a lot and don't want
to install these programs, you can run the script in a docker container. There is a dockerfile ready, the current docker
image is still heavy though.

Most probable use case might be when you need to test and possibly convert a huge amount of files and you
don't know in advance what file types you are dealing with. It features:

- file format identification and extraction of technical metadata with pygfried, ffprobe and imagemagick
- file integrity testing with ffmpeg and imagemagick
- file conversion with ffmpeg, imagemagick and LibreOffice using a json file as a protocol
- detailed logging

## Installation

### Recommended Programs

Install ffmpeg, imagemagick and LibreOffice if not already installed, or alternatively use a docker image.

#### MacOS (using homebrew)

```bash
brew install ffmpeg
brew install imagemagick
brew install ghostscript
brew install --cask libreoffice
```

#### Linux

Depending on your distribution:

- [ffmpeg](https://ffmpeg.org/download.html#build-linux)
- [imagemagick](https://imagemagick.org/script/download.php#linux)
- [LibreOffice](https://www.libreoffice.org/download/download-libreoffice)

On Debian/Ubuntu

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install ffmpeg imagemagick ghostscript libreoffice
```

### Python Dependencies

If you don't have [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) installed, install it with

```bash
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

Then, you can use `uv run` to run the fileidentification script.
This creates a venv and installs all necessary python dependencies:

```bash
uv run identify.py --help
```

## Quick Start

1. **Generate policies for your files:**
`uv run identify.py path/to/directory`

2. **Review generated policies:** Edit `path/to/directory_policies.json` to customize conversion rules

3. **Test files and apply the policies:**
`uv run indentify.py path/to/directory -iar`
or **if you want to use a docker image:**
`uv run indentify.py path/to/directory -iar --docker` this runs the script with the flags **-iar**
in a docker container (see **options** below)

### Docker

With the flag `--docker`, the script generates a docker image and executes itself in a docker container.

If you don't have the required programs installed, you need to append this flag if you run the script with
any of the flags `-i`, `-a`, `-t` (inspecting the files, file conversion and test conversion for a policy).
for all other options you are perfectly fine with the python dependencies.

## Single Execution Steps

### Detect File Formats - Generate Conversion Policies

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory`

Generate two json files:

**path/to/directory_log.json** : The technical metadata of all the files in the folder

**path/to/directory_policies.json** : A file conversion protocol for each file format
that was encountered in the folder according to the default policies located in
`fileidentification/policies/default.py`. Edit it to customize conversion rules.

### File Integrity Tests

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -i`

Test the files for their integrity and move corrupted files to the folder in `path/to/directory_WORKINGDIR/_REMOVED`.

You can also add the flag `-v` (`--verbose`) for more detailed inspection. (see **options** below)

NOTE: Currently only audio/video and image files are tested.

### File Conversion

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -a`

Apply the policies defined in `path/to/directory_policies.json` and convert files into their target file format.
The converted files are temporary stored in `path/to/directory_WORKINGDIR` (default) with the log output
of the program used as log.txt next to it.

### Clean Up Temporary Files

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -r`

Delete all temporary files and folders and move the converted files next to their parents.

### Combining Steps - Custom Policies and Working Directory

If you don't need these intermediary steps, you can run the desired steps at once by combining their flags.
Here is an example how to do verbose testing, applying a custom policy and set the location to the working
directory other than default (see **option** below for more information about the flags):

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -ariv -p path/to/custom_policies.json -w path/to/workingdir`

Another use case example: If you have a customised policies file and want to run it against a different folder and
apply it using docker

1. First generate the policies file for the folder with using an existing policies and extend it with file formats
encountered in the folder that are missing in the policies passed:
`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -ep somewhere/else/policies.json`

2. You might have a blank policy for a file type you didn't expect in the bulk file folder. Edit the policy with the
desired file conversion an run test conversion in a docker container:
`uv run identify.py path/to/directory --docker -t`

3. Inspect the files verbose, apply the policies and replace the parent files with the converted ones
all running in a docker container:
`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -ivarx --docker`

### Log

The **path/to/directory_log.json** takes track of all modifications in the target folder.  
Since with each execution of the script it checks whether such a log exists and read/appends to that file.  
Iterations of file conversions such as A -> B, B -> C, ... are logged in the same file.

If you wish a simpler csv output, you can add the flag `--csv` anytime when you run the script,
which converts the `log.json` of the actual status of the directory to a csv.

## Advanced Usage

You can also create your own policies file, and with that, customise the file conversion output.
Simply edit the generated default file `path/to/directory_policies.json` before applying.
If you want to start from scratch, run `uv run indentify.py path/to/directory -b` to create a
blank policies template with all the file formats encountered in the folder.

### Policy Specification

A policy for a file type consists of the following fields and uses its PRONOM Unique Identifier (PUID) as a key

| Field                | Type           |                                     |
|----------------------|----------------|-------------------------------------|
| **format_name**      | **str**        | optional                            |
| **bin**              | **str**        | required                            |
| **accepted**         | **bool**       | required                            |
| **target_container** | **str**        | required if field accepted is false |
| **processing_args**  | **str**        | required if field accepted is false |
| **expected**         | **list[str]**  | required if field accepted is false |
| **remove_original**  | **bool**       | required if field accepted is false |

- `format_name`: The name of the file format.
- `bin`: Program to convert or test the file. Literal[`""`, `"magick"`, `"ffmpeg"`, `"soffice"`].
(Testing currently only is supported on image/audio/video, i.e. ffmpeg and magick.)
- `accepted`: `false` if the file needs to be converted, `true` if it doesn't.
- `processing_args`: The arguments used with bin. Can also be an empty string if there is no need for such arguments.
- `expected`: the expected file format for the converted file as PUID
- `remove_original`: whether to keep the parent of the converted file in the directory, default is `false`

### Policy Examples

A policy for Audio/Video Interleaved Format (avi) that need to be transcoded to MPEG-4 Media File
(Codec: AVC/H.264, Audio: AAC) looks like this

```json
{
    "fmt/5": {
        "format_name": "Audio/Video Interleaved Format",
        "bin": "ffmpeg",
        "accepted": false,
        "target_container": "mp4",
        "processing_args": "-c:v libx264 -crf 18 -pix_fmt yuv420p -c:a aac",
        "expected": [
            "fmt/199"
        ],
        "remove_original": false
    }
}
```

A policy for Portable Network Graphics that is accepted as it is, but gets tested

```json
{
    "fmt/13": {
        "format_name": "Portable Network Graphics",
        "bin": "magick",
        "accepted": true
    }
}
```

**Policy Testing:**

You can test the outcome of the conversion policies (given that the path is path/to/directory_policies.json,
otherwise pass the path to the file with -p) with

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -t`

The script takes the smallest file for each conversion policy and converts it.
The converted files are located in _WORKINGDIR/_TEST.

If you just want to test a specific policy, append f and the puid

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -tf fmt/XXX`

## Modifying Default Settings

The default setting for file conversion are in **fileidentification/policies/default.py**, you can add or modify the
entries there. All other settings such as default path values or hash algorithm are in
**fileidentification/conf/settings.py**

## Options

`-i`
[`--integrity-tests`] tests the files for their integrity

`-v`
[`--verbose`] catches more warnings on video and image files during the integrity tests.
this can take a significantly longer based on what files you have. As an addition,
it handles some warnings as an error.

`-a`
[`--apply`] applies the policies

`-r`
[`--remove-tmp`] removes all temporary items and adds the converted files next to their parents.

`-x`
[`--remove-original`] this overwrites the remove_original value in the policies and sets it to true when removing
the tmp files. the original files are moved to the WORKINGDIR/_REMOVED folder.
When used in generating policies, it sets remove_original in the policies to true (default false).

`-p`
[`--policies-path`] load a custom policies json file

`-w`
[`--working-dir`] set a custom working directory. default is path/to/directory_WORKINGDIR

`-s`
[`--strict`] when run in strict mode, it moves the files that are not listed in policies.json to the folder _REMOVED
(instead of throwing a warning).
When used in generating policies, it does not add blank policies for formats that are not mentioned in
fileidentification/policies/default.py

`-b`
[`--blank`] creates a blank policies based on the files encountered in the given directory.

`-e`
[`--extend-policies`] append filetypes found in the directory to the given policies if they are missing in it.

`-q`
[`--quiet`] just print errors and warnings

`--csv`
get an additional output as csv aside from the log.json

`--convert`
re-convert the files that failed during file conversion

`--docker`
this runs the script with the flags in a docker container. Please note that with this
option the flags **-p**, **-w**, **-b** and **-e** are ignored.

## using it in your code

as long as you have all the dependencies installed and run python **version >=3.8**, have **typer**, **pydanic**, **pygfried**
installed in your project, you can copy the fileidentification folder into your project folder and import the
FileHandler to your code

```python
from fileidentification.filehandling import FileHandler


# this runs it with default parameters (flags -ivarq), but change the parameters to your needs
fh = FileHandler()
fh.run("path/to/directory")


# or if you just want to do integrity tests
fh = FileHandler()
fh.integrity_tests("path/to/directory")

# log it at some point and have an additional csv
fh.write_logs("path/where/to/log", to_csv=True)

```

## Updating Signatures

```bash
uv run update.py && uv lock --upgrade
```

## Useful Links

You'll find a good resource to query for fileformats on
[nationalarchives.gov.uk](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/PRONOM/Format/proFormatSearch.aspx?status=new)

The Homepage of siegfried
[itforarchivists.com/siegfried/](https://www.itforarchivists.com/siegfried/)

List of File Signatures on
[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_file_signatures)

Preservation recommendations
[kost](https://kost-ceco.ch/cms/de.html)
[bundesarchiv](https://www.bar.admin.ch/dam/bar/de/dokumente/konzepte_und_weisungen/archivtaugliche_dateiformate.1.pdf.download.pdf/archivtaugliche_dateiformate.pdf)

**NOTE**
if you want to convert to pdf/A, you need LibreOffice version 7.4+

when you convert svg, you might run into errors as the default library of imagemagick is not that good.
easiest workaround is installing inkscape ( `brew install --cask inkscape` ), make sure that you reinstall imagemagick,
so its uses inkscape as default for converting svg ( `brew remove imagemagick` , `brew install imagemagick`)

Commit message:

chore : refactor policies using pydantic, use .env for default paths, add non dasch default policies (and RDU-115, RDU-117) (#41)
* v2.2.0

* rm old files

* formatting with ruff

* fix README, simplify PDF export settings

* ...

README.md, after:

# Fileidentification

A python CLI to identify file formats and bulk convert files. It is designed for digital preservation workflows
and is basically a python wrapper around several programs. It uses [pygfried](https://pypi.org/project/pygfried/)
(a CPython extension for [siegfried](https://www.itforarchivists.com/siegfried)), ffmpeg, imagemagick (optionally inkscape) and
LibreOffice, so it's recommended to have those installed. If you are not using fileidentification a lot and don't want
to install these programs, you can run the script in a docker container. There is a dockerfile ready, the current docker
image is still heavy though.

Most probable use case might be when you need to test and possibly convert a huge amount of files and you
don't know in advance what file types you are dealing with. It features:

- file format identification and extraction of technical metadata with pygfried, ffprobe and imagemagick
- file integrity testing with ffmpeg and imagemagick
- file conversion with ffmpeg, imagemagick and LibreOffice using a json file as a protocol
- detailed logging

## Installation

### Recommended Programs

Install ffmpeg, imagemagick and LibreOffice if not already installed, or alternatively use a docker image.

#### MacOS (using homebrew)

```bash
brew install ffmpeg
brew install imagemagick
brew install ghostscript
brew install --cask libreoffice
```

#### Linux

Depending on your distribution:

- [ffmpeg](https://ffmpeg.org/download.html#build-linux)
- [imagemagick](https://imagemagick.org/script/download.php#linux)
- [LibreOffice](https://www.libreoffice.org/download/download-libreoffice)

On Debian/Ubuntu

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install ffmpeg imagemagick ghostscript libreoffice
```

### Python Dependencies

If you don't have [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) installed, install it with

```bash
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

Then, you can use `uv run` to run the fileidentification script.
This creates a venv and installs all necessary python dependencies:

```bash
uv run identify.py --help
```

## Quick Start

1. **Generate policies for your files:**
`uv run identify.py path/to/directory`

2. **Review generated policies:** Edit `path/to/directory_policies.json` to customize conversion rules

3. **Test files and apply the policies:**
`uv run indentify.py path/to/directory -iar`
or **if you want to use a docker image:**
`uv run indentify.py path/to/directory -iar --docker` this runs the script with the flags **-iar**
in a docker container (see **options** below)

### Docker

With the flag `--docker`, the script generates a docker image and executes itself in a docker container.

If you don't have the required programs installed, you need to append this flag if you run the script with
any of the flags `-i`, `-a`, `-t` (inspecting the files, file conversion and test conversion for a policy).
for all other options you are perfectly fine with the python dependencies.

## Single Execution Steps

### Detect File Formats - Generate Conversion Policies

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory`

Generate two json files:

**path/to/directory_log.json** : The technical metadata of all the files in the folder

**path/to/directory_policies.json** : A file conversion protocol for each file format
that was encountered in the folder according to the default policies located in
`fileidentification/policies/default.py`. Edit it to customize conversion rules.

### File Integrity Tests

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -i`

Test the files for their integrity and move corrupted files to the folder in `path/to/directory_TMP/_REMOVED`.

You can also add the flag `-v` (`--verbose`) for more detailed inspection. (see **options** below)

NOTE: Currently only audio/video and image files are tested.

### File Conversion

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -a`

Apply the policies defined in `path/to/directory_policies.json` and convert files into their target file format.
The converted files are temporary stored in `path/to/directory_TMP` (default) with the log output
of the program used as log.txt next to it.

### Clean Up Temporary Files

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -r`

Delete all temporary files and folders and move the converted files next to their parents.

### Combining Steps - Custom Policies and Working Directory

If you don't need these intermediary steps, you can run the desired steps at once by combining their flags.
Here is an example how to do verbose testing, applying a custom policy and set the location to the tmp
directory other than default (see **option** below for more information about the flags):

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -ariv -p path/to/custom_policies.json --tmp-dir path/to/tmp-dir`

Another use case example: If you have a customised policies file and want to run it against a different folder and
apply it using docker

1. First generate the policies file for the folder with using an existing policies and extend it with file formats
encountered in the folder that are missing in the policies passed:
`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -ep somewhere/else/policies.json`

2. You might have a blank policy for a file type you didn't expect in the bulk file folder. Edit the policy with the
desired file conversion an run test conversion in a docker container:
`uv run identify.py path/to/directory --docker -t`

3. Inspect the files verbose, apply the policies and replace the parent files with the converted ones
all running in a docker container:
`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -ivarx --docker`

### Log

The **path/to/directory_log.json** takes track of all modifications in the target folder.  
Since with each execution of the script it checks whether such a log exists and read/appends to that file.  
Iterations of file conversions such as A -> B, B -> C, ... are logged in the same file.

If you wish a simpler csv output, you can add the flag `--csv` anytime when you run the script,
which converts the `log.json` of the actual status of the directory to a csv.

## Advanced Usage

You can also create your own policies file, and with that, customise the file conversion output.
Simply edit the generated default file `path/to/directory_policies.json` before applying.
If you want to start from scratch, run `uv run indentify.py path/to/directory -b` to create a
blank policies template with all the file formats encountered in the folder.

### Policy Specification

A policy for a file type consists of the following fields and uses its PRONOM Unique Identifier (PUID) as a key

| Field                | Type           |                                     |
|----------------------|----------------|-------------------------------------|
| **format_name**      | **str**        | optional                            |
| **bin**              | **str**        | required                            |
| **accepted**         | **bool**       | required                            |
| **target_container** | **str**        | required if field accepted is false |
| **processing_args**  | **str**        | required if field accepted is false |
| **expected**         | **list[str]**  | required if field accepted is false |
| **remove_original**  | **bool**       | optional (default is `false`)       |

- `format_name`: The name of the file format.
- `bin`: Program to convert or test the file. Literal[`""`, `"magick"`, `"ffmpeg"`, `"soffice"`].
(Testing currently only is supported on image/audio/video, i.e. ffmpeg and magick.)
- `accepted`: `false` if the file needs to be converted, `true` if it doesn't.
- `processing_args`: The arguments used with bin. Can also be an empty string if there is no need for such arguments.
- `expected`: the expected file format for the converted file as PUID
- `remove_original`: whether to keep the parent of the converted file in the directory, default is `false`

### Policy Examples

A policy for Audio/Video Interleaved Format (avi) that need to be transcoded to MPEG-4 Media File
(Codec: AVC/H.264, Audio: AAC) looks like this

```json
{
    "fmt/5": {
        "format_name": "Audio/Video Interleaved Format",
        "bin": "ffmpeg",
        "accepted": false,
        "target_container": "mp4",
        "processing_args": "-c:v libx264 -crf 18 -pix_fmt yuv420p -c:a aac",
        "expected": [
            "fmt/199"
        ],
        "remove_original": false
    }
}
```

A policy for Portable Network Graphics that is accepted as it is, but gets tested

```json
{
    "fmt/13": {
        "format_name": "Portable Network Graphics",
        "bin": "magick",
        "accepted": true
    }
}
```

**Policy Testing:**

You can test the outcome of the conversion policies (given that the path is path/to/directory_policies.json,
otherwise pass the path to the file with -p) with

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -t`

The script takes the smallest file for each conversion policy and converts it.
The converted files are located in _TMP/_TEST.

If you just want to test a specific policy, append f and the puid

`uv run identify.py path/to/directory -tf fmt/XXX`

## Modifying Default Settings

In the .env file you can customise some default path: e.g. the paths to the default policies, set custom default
tmp dir location.

Other default params such as PDF/A export settings for LibreOffice or other strings are in 
`fileidentification/defenitions/constants.py`.

## Options

`-i`
[`--integrity-tests`] tests the files for their integrity

`-v`
[`--verbose`] catches more warnings on video and image files during the integrity tests.
this can take a significantly longer based on what files you have. As an addition,
it handles some warnings as an error.

`-a`
[`--apply`] applies the policies

`-r`
[`--remove-tmp`] removes all temporary items and adds the converted files next to their parents.

`-x`
[`--remove-original`] this overwrites the remove_original value in the policies and sets it to true when removing
the tmp files. the original files are moved to the TMP/_REMOVED folder.
When used in generating policies, it sets remove_original in the policies to true (default false).

`-p`
[`--policies-path`] load a custom policies json file

`-s`
[`--strict`] when run in strict mode, it moves the files that are not listed in policies.json to the folder _REMOVED
(instead of throwing a warning).
When used in generating policies, it does not add blank policies for formats that are not mentioned in
fileidentification/policies/default.py

`-b`
[`--blank`] creates a blank policies based on the files encountered in the given directory.

`-e`
[`--extend-policies`] append filetypes found in the directory to the given policies if they are missing in it.

`-q`
[`--quiet`] just print errors and warnings

`--tmp-dir` set a custom tmp directory where converted / removed files are stored. default is path/to/directory_TMP

`--csv`
get an additional output as csv aside from the log.json

`--convert`
re-convert the files that failed during file conversion

`--docker`
this runs the script with the flags in a docker container. Please note that with this
option the flags **--tmp-dir**, **-p**, **-b** and **-e** are ignored.

## using it in your code

as long as you have all the dependencies installed and run python **version >=3.8**, have **typer**, **pydanic**, **pygfried**
installed in your project, you can copy the fileidentification folder into your project folder and import the
FileHandler to your code

```python
from fileidentification.filehandling import FileHandler


# this runs it with default parameters (flags -ivarq), but change the parameters to your needs
fh = FileHandler()
fh.run("path/to/directory")


# or if you just want to do integrity tests
fh = FileHandler()
fh.integrity_tests("path/to/directory")

# log it at some point and have an additional csv
fh.write_logs("path/where/to/log", to_csv=True)

```

## Updating Signatures

```bash
uv run update.py && uv lock --upgrade
```

## Useful Links

You'll find a good resource to query for fileformats on
[nationalarchives.gov.uk](https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/PRONOM/Format/proFormatSearch.aspx?status=new)

The Homepage of siegfried
[itforarchivists.com/siegfried/](https://www.itforarchivists.com/siegfried/)

List of File Signatures on
[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_file_signatures)

Preservation recommendations
[kost](https://kost-ceco.ch/cms/de.html)
[bundesarchiv](https://www.bar.admin.ch/dam/bar/de/dokumente/konzepte_und_weisungen/archivtaugliche_dateiformate.1.pdf.download.pdf/archivtaugliche_dateiformate.pdf)

**NOTE**
if you want to convert to pdf/A, you need LibreOffice version 7.4+

when you convert svg, you might run into errors as the default library of imagemagick is not that good.
easiest workaround is installing inkscape ( `brew install --cask inkscape` ), make sure that you reinstall imagemagick,
so its uses inkscape as default for converting svg ( `brew remove imagemagick` , `brew install imagemagick`)
